Chapter 11: Dissonance
Corbin handed Vash a sheaf of papers as the helicopter reached a comfortable cruising altitude and sped out of Conurbation One, following the course of an arterial linear arcology that snaked north-east along the ragged coast. Vash leafed through the printouts, scanning over the profiles of the dozen or so special operatives detailed within.
'Their record is certainly impeccable. Do you trust them?' Vash asked, leaning in towards Corbin so as to make himself heard over the drone of the helicopter's twin turboprops.
'As much as I trust anyone, yes,' Corbin replied, smiling reassuringly. Vash knew the man well enough to recognise the remark as high praise. 'In my old line of work you had to have one another’s backs. The politicking of Arco can be vicious but out in the field...'
'I sometimes forget who you were. When did you leave to join the Internal branch - it must have been three, four years now?'
'Don't remind them of that!' Corbin laughed. 'And certainly don't tell them about my cushy Directorship - they'll mock me enough as it is. But in all seriousness, that kind of bond won't fade. I have their loyalty.'
Vash nodded. There was no time to assemble another team, and he didn’t want to test his authority by ordering directors to supply more troops, but for all that he tried to rationalise it, Vash could not dispel the sense of disquiet he felt. He passed the sheaf of printouts back to Corbin before turning to watch the world rushing by beneath them.
Slate-grey waves beat against the coastal levees, water sluicing down into sheltered overflow channels where it was gathered for desalination or directed towards the big thorium plants that powered the hulking form of the linear arcology beyond. From this height the vast structure still conferred a sense of the order imagined when it had been built, a couple of generations into the Dynic occupation, when such feats were still possible. In reality little was left of the original but the superstructure; the carcass of some leviathan of carbon allotropes and secrete, washed ashore in a storm. Only bleached bone had survived decay and the predation of scavengers.
'You mentioned a dragon's tooth; the symbol painted on the tank,' Corbin said at length.
'That's what it looked like,' Vash replied, not turning from the window.
Under the gathering gloom of the tempestuous evening sky the vast bank of the arcology lit up with a cold brilliance, although great stretches remained shuttered and dark, with small fires and the odd huddle of lights the only sign of occupation.
'You thought it might have some significance. You said it could be important,' Corbin prompted. ‘You said it might be more important than anything.’
Vash could feel the pressure of Corbin's eyes on him. He was certain the man knew he was concealing something. The silence stretched.
Vash trusted Corbin, even enjoyed his company; his friend's tone was conversational. So why did this feel like an interrogation? The casual tone might have fooled someone less acquainted with the man’s moods, but Corbin was already hungry for information.
Not for the first time since seeing a dragon's tooth emblazoned on the vehicle of a quixotic revolutionary movement, Vash wondered whether he should just tell Corbin what he suspected.
'I thought I recognised it from somewhere. It's a befitting symbol for a militant group, even if it’s no more than a coincidence, don't you think?'
'Skeleton warriors and dragon's teeth,' Corbin mused. 'All a bit portentous, isn't it?' he gave an easy smile. ‘It’s as if the Revolution is announcing itself to us.’
What was it that stopped him from saying more? A fear that Corbin would leap to conclusions of his own? A selfish desire to keep the revelation to himself - perhaps that symbol had been intended for him specifically? Or a sense that Corbin would reveal it all to truly be nothing more than coincidence?
‘They've hardly shown a predilection for the conventional.'
'You could say that,' Corbin laughed.
How long had Vash waited for some promise from the past, a reassurance that there had been a plan that he might play a part in, instead of desperately improvising? He knew that to be able to relinquish even a fraction of the responsibility he bore with clear conscience would grant him profound relief. He also knew he shouldn’t fixate on such a faint possibility - instead he would focus on the evidence he had available and make the best decisions he could. It was too early yet to call the developing knot of intentions in his head a plan, but the beginnings of one? Maybe.
There was another lull, both men momentarily lost in their own thoughts.
'Why the secrecy, sir? I mean, I understand that the kidnapping of one of them is a delicate matter, but why the insistence that you handle this personally?’ Corbin asked. ‘I would be far more suited to leading this operation. I'll reiterate my offer...'
'Strictly speaking Liar to Animals would probably object to you knowing the amount that you do already but - '
'Liar to Animals?' Corbin interrupted, taking the bait.
'K'txl, the voice on the phone - it's the meaning of her name. I can't help but feel something was lost in translation there,' Vash smiled wryly.
'Definitely not the most reassuring name for something speaking to us on behalf of its species,' grinned Corbin, warming to the theme. ‘So what does it have to hide?’
'Even the Dyn aren't a monolithic bloc, for all that they appear to be. My becoming Ambassador was the direct result of her own rise to power within the firmament,' Vash said. 'Suffice to say there is a faction that opposes her and the loss of her ‘heir’, on the surface of the planet she’s meant to control, would be a major blow to her legitimacy.’
'Surely any opposing faction could have seen all this from orbit? And thousands of people will know by now what happened.'
'We simply have to hope that nobody else knows enough to realise the bigger picture - merely being capable of seeing this all unfold from orbit is besides the point. You have to know where to look in the first place.'
Corbin considered this for a moment then nodded as though it confirmed some suspicion of his.
'So why should we care if our current alien overlord is replaced by another? Let me guess, it threatened to smite another couple of cities if we didn't rescue it's progeny?' asked Corbin, flippantly. His grin faded when he saw Vash's expression.
'If we fail and K'txl is toppled, everyone on Earth dies.’
'And why should we believe the threats of something that refers to itself as Liar to Animals?'
Vash paused. The arcology they were flying over now was utterly dark, difficult to distinguish from the mountainous coast. The region had been evacuated following a nuclear accident several decades back and the exclusion zone remained utterly devoid of any significant human presence. It was thus ideal for their purposes - there was scant chance of discovery out here. They must be nearing the rendezvous.
'K'txl...' He searched for the right words. 'K'txl spoke through a girl - their minds were linked, connected using old technology the Dyn have managed to reverse engineer. K'txl claimed she had done this so that she could understand us, in order to resolve our differences. She told me that she wanted peace.’
'Surely that would have been easier before they massacred several hundred million people and turned our own world into a godforsaken prison?'
'I don't think they have any intuitive grasp of the abstract concepts that come naturally to us,' Vash said carefully, trying a different angle of approach. 'You know, things like justice or ethics. K’txl spoke of them as though they were some kind of sickness - a mass hallucination was how she referred to it. She seemed particularly afraid of universal morality; that by some objective measure an action could be deemed to be fundamentally moral, or immoral.'
Corbin didn’t say a word, he just shook his head, disbelieving.
'K'txl asked me if I thought she was evil,' said Vash. Corbin let out a bark of bitter laughter. 'She said that we would have seen their nature as something that had to be righted, that we would not be able to tolerate their existence. You were right, you know - Dynic technology really was the more primitive. So they invaded preemptively, using the only advantage they had and have held us hostage ever since.'
'And you're willing to take it on its word?'
'What reason would K'txl have to lie, Corbin? To compel me to rescue the next in her line? Why bother with such an elaborate threat? There are few logical motives to invade across interstellar space, even with an impossible artefact like the Other Moon to improve the logistics. I don't claim to be able to read an alien's intentions, but if that machinery translated anything then what it conveyed most forcefully was fear.’
A solitary flare was burning out on one of the upper tiers and the helicopter began its descent. Vash leant in again, holding Corbin’s gaze.
‘K'txl claims to seek understanding, but having heard what I have there is no doubt in my mind that there are Dyn up there that given half the chance would wipe this planet clean and deal with the consequences later. So yes, we take K'txl on her word.'
Interlude: Unmake the World
They had discovered alien life before, of course. One did not expand across such an unknowably large distance and fail to find habitable worlds. But nothing like this. The hives covered the planet’s surface; swarming, seething masses of them. Even orbit, so serene above the surface of the homeworld, was choked with them. Further away, lights in the dark indicated ship drives, flitting around the edge of the system. They all felt a deepening sense of claustrophobia as the armada passed through the gate, a wretchedness verging on suffocation.
They had found the outer edge of the new species’ expansion years ago, an isolated ship riding a beam of subnuclear fire. Their armada had waited, not really knowing how to begin communicating with such an alien race. But they didn’t have to wait long; the explorer ship remained silent for a few days and then broadcast a perfectly formed reply in their own language. This ability was, needless to say, impossible. As they began to understand the content of the explorer’s messages, that promised kinds of sharing and mind-alteration strange and obscene, the aliens’ technological powers became more and more apparent.
The various messages were untangled. Each new idea was more strange and terrible than the last. These aliens lived within a dream, motivated by things that didn’t really exist, supporting their insanities with godlike powers. Conflict was inevitable. The foreign vessel extinguished itself before it could be captured. But all was not lost.
They assembled all known ships - every ship ever built, everything that could carry a weapon from every corner of known space. Old conflicts and rivalries were ignored, fading into irrelevance in the face of such a titanic struggle. Coordination was simple and immediate. It was not a matter of discussion or cooperation. Rather, it was simply the case that new information became available and everyone, everywhere came to the same conclusion simultaneously. They had the advantage, if they took this last, desperate step. Their way of life could survive.
The alien home system was dense with replicating machines, but they waited inertly and responded far too slowly. The route taken enabled a surprise attack close to the alien homeworld. They possessed few weapons in the instant of meeting, but the capacity to create them had not been forgotten. Surprise was necessary.
More messages were beamed by the aliens; demands for unity and understanding where none could exist, requests and pleas, digital pulses that seemed to want to bypass their minds entirely.
They ignored all these, for their course had been decided upon since they had received the first messages from the lone explorer that had crossed their path. The logic was clear to all who observed; they could risk servility, extinction or corruption or strike fast and deal with the aftermath later, for these two species could ultimately never coexist in the same universe.
They did not wish to exterminate, merely to contain, to quarantine, so that understanding could take place on their own terms. Maximal force was required. Projectiles were deployed, targeting centres of communication and the spindly webs strung in orbit; any resistance, any blizzard of kinetics or electronic warfare was dealt with by deorbiting a habitat. Asteroidal material was flung at the planet and its single large moon. Their command of the alien language was marshalled and used to broadcast an ultimatum to the rest of the system, showing that there would be no compromise, that opposition was to stand down or death would come to all.
The aliens understood.
