Chapter 14: Convergence
'Over on the mountain, thunder magic spoke
'Let the people know my wisdom, fill the land with smoke'
Better run through the jungle
Better run through the jungle
Better run through the jungle
Whoa, don’t look back to see'
Creedence Clearwater Revival
Tuva and another grabbed Jan roughly and led him away from where Christo and Aurelie stood, deep in conversation with the enemy.
He glanced back, anger growing as Christo threw back his head and laughed, placing an affirming hand on Vash’s shoulder. It seemed as though something in the world had broken; this strange, gaunt dictator had wandered out of screens and posters and into real life. And just like that, they were all supposed to believe he was an ally.
‘Today’s your lucky day, huh?’ Tuva sneered as she followed his gaze.
Jan hardly heard her. Christo had announced to them all that Vash had always hated the Dyn. But what did that matter, if his actions didn’t match his words? He was a collaborator and his hands were steeped in blood regardless of what feelings he might secretly harbour. Jan knew all too well what his involvement meant; whether it succeeded or failed, the revolution wouldn’t wipe away Arco. Work with collaborators and what did you become? Wastelanders knew this - they had seen it happen before. Half the self-styled rebels out there fought using Arco’s armaments. Christo was even more naive than Jan had feared if he didn’t suspect Vash’s motives.
As for Aurelie; she was no longer the enigma she had been. She wanted him dead; she was a threat.
Jan noticed a sudden shift in Christo; the man’s easy stance grew rigid. The change rippled outwards from him across the revolutionaries gathered on the beach, as everyone fell still. One by one they turned again to watch the cliff edge and Jan instinctively followed, his captors momentarily distracted. At last he heard it, barely audible above the rain and surf but growing in intensity, getting closer. The sound of gunfire and the drone of rotor blades. The column of soldiers, pursuing them so patiently ever since their flight from Conurbation Fifteen, had arrived.
Without warning the autocannons mounted on the crawler let rip, thudding out shells that arced away from the shore. The shots seemed to tear the revolutionaries from their collective trance, and as if on cue the beach exploded with frenetic activity.
‘- everyone into position,’ came Christo’s voice from the radio on Tuva’s belt. ‘Have the mortars fire over the cliff - spotters on the crawler can direct fire. Otherwise dig in. We only need to buy time.’
‘Tuva, I need a weapon,’ Jan called as she turned to leave him.
‘What, so you can turn it on us again? Piss off,’ she spat. ‘You stay away from our fight, and if Arco’s having a really good day they might just take you alive.’
‘Without one I’m just dead weight. I’ve got as much reason to make sure the bathyscaphe leaves as anyone,’ he pleaded.
‘You’ve got to be joking. You think Christo still wants you on the sub?’ Tuva laughed incredulously. ‘He trusted you, but he’s no fool. He won’t make that mistake twice.’
‘You think Vash deserves a place?’
‘What, because he’s a collaborator? If he is then what does that make you? You were conspiring with one of them, remember? At least he can claim to have been doing it for our good. What’s your excuse?’
‘Tuva, she’s still alive,’ he said, grabbing her shoulder as she turned to leave again. She spun round, elbowing him hard in the stomach. Jan doubled over, gasping for breath. He collapsed onto the wet shingle with his hands still bound tightly together and rolled over, trying to force himself to a sitting position.
‘Touch me again and you won’t live to regret it,’ Tuva hissed, eyes flaring with anger. ‘Stay out the way. Or better yet, go lie on one of the barricades. At least then you’d be good for something.’ She stalked off in the direction of the trenches, directing the revolutionaries to mounted weapons and cover.
Jan cast his eyes around, momentarily at a loss as to what to do. The bathyscaphe, now slung beneath a massive float, had been mounted between the twin hulls of a crude catamaran which lay at anchor just offshore. Waves were already swirling beneath its bulbous hull, yet even now Pao and the other technicians clambered over it, running last-minute checks as the tide rose and the enemy closed in around them.
His only hope of seeing his daughter again was to somehow get the Dyn onto the catamaran, then aboard the sub. But how? Even with his hands bound, Jan could stand and manage a run, but what would be the point? Tuva or Aurelie would gun him down before he ever made it to the sea, let alone the bathyscaphe.
The revolutionaries were dug in, seeking what little shelter the shallow trenches and makeshift barricades afforded. The clouds seemed to descend on them, as if even the sky was hoping to block their escape. He heard a faint rumble, which dopplered as it grew louder.
Flares erupted from the crawler atop the cliff, brilliant against the clouds, and a missile shrieked through the blinding haze, narrowly missing its mark. One of the helicopters followed; flying low, gatling cannons burring as it strafed the beach, the noise almost unbearably loud. He cowered where he lay and struggled desperately to free himself. The helicopter shot out over the sea and banked around. Still unable to loosen the cords around his hands, Jan boosted himself to a standing position. As the noise of the rotors began to louden again he half sprinted, half stumbled towards the circle of vehicles that marked the location of the Dyn prisoner, his bound hands throwing off his balance, finally reaching a supply truck and sliding past its bulk. Another strafing run sounded behind him.
The Dyn lay in that sheltered place, still immobilised. It fixed one of those soulless eyes on Jan as he came into view, only speaking as he drew close.
‘Still alive. You are resourceful, that is good.’
‘Not for much longer, not if I don’t get off this beach. Arco’s here to rescue you.’
‘I hear. But I don’t want their rescue - nothing has changed. Take me with you and I will ensure you see your daughter unharmed.’ Jan winced, but he didn’t press the alien further. They still had a deal.
‘I’m not much good to you at the moment,’ he said, showing the Dyn his hands, still trussed behind his back.
‘That is no problem. How do you think I was able to get to the photograph?’
The Dyn shifted, straining against the restraints that pinned it down. Jan took a precautionary step back, gaping as it contorted its right forelimb in a way that would have implied broken bones, had it been a terrestrial animal. It was sickening to watch, despite the Dyn’s alien physiology. The long blade-like claws that adorned each forelimb retracted and with a final twist the Dyn slipped free of the rope that had bound it.
‘You could have escaped whenever you wanted.’
‘Yet I didn’t,’ came the Dyn’s response. The stutter of gunfire was growing louder beyond the ring of vehicles.
Jan approached the Dyn warily and turned his back so that it could cut him loose. He did his best not to cringe away as its cold skin brushed against his, but the anticipated death blow never came. His hands were freed and the Dyn withdrew.
‘We need to wait for a distraction before we can make for the sub,’ said Jan, rubbing his wrists where the rope had chafed. ‘Arco will be forced to push down onto the beach if they’re hoping to free you - that will be our best chance. Until then, lie low.’ He fumbled with the knots that still bound the Dyn’s other limbs.
He heard the crump of explosions as the mortar teams fired a volley at assailants still unseen. It just lay there, unresponsive.
‘Do you understand?’ he pressed.
‘I understand.’
‘Good. Time to make myself useful,’ said Jan, glancing around furtively. He ducked away from the shelter of the vehicles and backed out into the open, making for the nearest trench.
The first helicopter flew back out over the beach, exchanging fire with the crawler, heavy calibre machine guns raking over the armoured top decks. The crawler’s autocannons found their mark, lines of tracer converging on the helicopter, sending it spinning out of the sky. The rotor blades shredded apart as they hit the waves, sending debris and spray flying. As Jan closed to within meters of the trench, a pair of missiles streaked out of nowhere, arrowing into the side of the crawler. He felt the concussion in his chest.
The first missile detonated ineffectively against the crawler’s armoured flank. The second made it through. It must have ignited something within, as a brilliant flash gored the massive vehicle open, throwing up a great pillar of smoke and sending scraps of debris raining down on the beach. Jan saw a few surviving revolutionaries dashing clear, abseiling down the cliff in disarray. With the crawler gone it wouldn’t be long before Arco had secured the clifftop, enabling them to lay down suppressing fire.
Jan made it to one of the trenches just moments before the first shots thwacked into the barricades. He dived to the ground beside a revolutionary. The fighter, head mostly covered by a metal shell-helmet, didn’t even turn to look at the new arrival, preoccupied by enemies on the cliff above.
‘I don’t have a weapon!’ Jan shouted, his voice drowned out as another barrage of mortar shells struck the clifftop. The suppressing fire abated.
‘Out the way!’ The fighter motioned impatiently for Jan to move, and crouching low he returned fire, taking advantage of the brief lull. Spent rounds clinked off the shingle.
He’d done his frantic best to plan ahead, but already the available ways out seemed to be vanishing. If he could get hold of a gun, then he had a better chance of making it to the bathyscaphe. If he could rendezvous with the Dyn then maybe he could get it aboard and escape… But who was he kidding? Christo was right. They were all out of plan. He couldn’t pretend this was anything more than improvising.
The revolutionary next to Jan slumped forwards, his helmet holed by a high calibre round, his rifle slipping from his grasp. Jan dived for the man’s weapon and hefted it, settling the stock against his shoulder.
A dark shape roared overhead, close enough that Jan could feel the downdraft, twin blades fanning the smoke away. The helicopter discharged another volley of micro-missiles on the line of trenches, and the world whited out as explosions engulfed heavy weapons, support vehicles and revolutionaries alike. Jan ducked down again, getting as low as he could and only daring to raise his head when the gunship had passed.
Armour clad Enforcers leapt from the helicopter as it descended to hover barely fifty metres from where the Dyn lay, still concealed, and they fanned out amid the smoke and debris, taking advantage of the chaos to push on the trenches.
As the helicopter attempted to lift away it was caught in the glare of Christo’s strange gun, the metal glowing with heat where that pale beam of light caught it. The fuel on board went up and the aircraft spiralled out of control, belching flame. Christo was running towards the Arco troopers, seemingly heedless of the danger, already turning the gun on the advancing figures. A number of Enforcers, caught out of cover, collapsed in flames as Christo’s beam weapon played across their useless armour, and the revolutionaries rallied around him. Their triumph was short-lived, as more reinforcements arrived.
Jan turned his weapon towards the advancing squad. The recoil sent his shots wide, the noise deafening. Another revolutionary was knocked down beside Jan, a burst of gunfire from a squad of Enforcers zipping very close to his shoulder. Another squad rushed towards Jan and the surviving revolutionaries.
Jan levelled his rifle at another Enforcer, braced for the recoil this time, and fired again until the rifle clicked; no more ammo. The remaining Enforcers reached their position, one of them drawing a bayonet knife. Jan swung the butt of the rifle wildly at the soldier’s arm.
The stock of the rifle smashed the knife out of the enemy’s hands and another jab at the his face sent him sprawling to the ground. Jan grabbed a fallen gun, swinging it around as he fired. The stubby carbine coughed and fired a nanowire flechette that tore the enemy’s chest armour apart.
He never even saw who threw the grenade. A moving shape caught his eye, and before his mind had processed the thought he was backpedalling frantically. Then the blast came.
As his vision cleared and the ringing in his ears died away Jan patted himself down, frantically checking for shrapnel wounds; he seemed to be okay. Then he caught sight of a body lying nearby, its face obscured by an unruly tangle of black hair. His heart dropped.
Jan rushed over to where Christo lay, momentarily oblivious to the precariousness of his position and dragged him back into cover, fearing the worst. The man was still alive, but only just; his pulse was weak and his breathing ragged. A brutal gash marred his torso, cutting from diaphragm to navel. Jan tore his top into strips and did his best to bind the wound.
Jan glanced from the catamaran, still floating on the sea behind, to Christo and back, torn by indecision. Of the Dyn there was no trace, it’s hiding place was already overrun. He just had to hope it had somehow escaped. If he didn’t move soon the Enforcers would be upon him and he would never see Eva again regardless of what had happened to the alien. But Christo was hurt, and he couldn’t bring himself to leave him there to die.
‘We need help!’ he called over the din of battle. ‘Christo’s injured!’ His own voice sounded distant and wrong. A couple of fighters ran past, but they either didn’t hear him or didn’t care.
‘Someone, help me!’ Jan called again, his voice hoarse.
Another figure clambered over the barricade, rifle slung over one shoulder; Tuva. She snarled when she saw him and for a moment he thought she would shoot him, but then she noticed Christo and rushed to kneel by his side. She cursed under her breath.
‘We’re going to get you out of here, Christo,’ she promised, barely bothering to conceal her distress. ‘You’re not going to be a martyr today. How bad is it?’ she asked, turning to Jan.
Jan’s expression must have said all that needed saying.
‘Help me get him up,’ she snapped. ‘We’re leaving. Might not be how he pictured it, but right now I don’t give a crap.’
Together they lifted him, one under each arm, and struggled down to the surf as quickly as they could manage. Christo’s beret and bandolier, the affectations of a revolutionary, lay discarded behind them.
Caught between the withering hail of fire from the clifftop and the soldiers pressing from the flank, the resolve of the remaining fighters collapsed. They fled in disarray, in the only direction they could. Breaking cover, many never even made it to the sea before they were gunned down. Jan’s only hope of making it off the beach himself lay in being one target amongst many.
Jan and Tuva waded into the surf, Christo a dead weight between them, his head lolling and his feet dragging through the water. Tuva muttered assurances to Christo all the while, as much to convince herself, Jan suspected, as to console the comatose revolutionary. He glanced over his shoulder; the Arco troops had stopped advancing, firing in short bursts at the fleeing mob plunging into the sea.
He ignored the bodies floating face down in the water that rose around him and the bullets whizzing past, keeping his eyes fixed determinedly ahead, on Aurelie and the bathyscaphe.
‘Jan?’
He was so focussed on keeping his head above the waves, on getting to the bathyscaphe, that he didn’t even notice the sudden absence at first, a silence more deafening than the battle that had preceded it.
‘Jan!’ hissed Tuva, more urgently this time.
The shooting had ceased, as abruptly as it had begun.
‘Look - Arco are pulling back…’ He turned to look back at the beach and even as she spoke the words his blood ran cold at the realisation. ‘The Dyn - they’re going to bomb us.’
They didn’t hesitate, swimming for the catamaran as hard as they could, thrashing at the water, dragging Christo along with them. Jan drew on every last reserve of strength he had left. His vision clouded, but he forced himself to keep struggling against the waves.
He pictured the sky above the clouds alive with alien stars, visible even in full daylight. An entire constellation, radiating malevolent intent, manoeuvring into position overhead. They had minutes at best to get as far away from here as possible.
The other survivors had also realised what was happening. Fortunately they had a head start on most of those fleeing, but, not burdened by Christo, the others were catching up.
The lonely bark of a warning shot sounded from the catamaran, bleak and hopeless. The revolutionaries were desperate and in no mood to listen - what difference would it make to heed that warning if it only meant death moments later at the hands of those above? More shots rang out in quick succession and Jan saw a man fall from the deck into the waters and the gathering crowd below, to shouts of outrage and desperation. Aurelie and a pair of guards held the line for now, but for how much longer? Soon they would be overwhelmed by sheer weight of numbers.
‘Get back!’ Aurelie shouted, her face betraying dismay when she saw Jan and Tuva amid the crowd.
‘We have Christo - he’s injured!’ Tuva called as they swam closer. That drew their attention. ‘There’s medical supplies on the sub. He needs help urgently!’
‘There’s no room - Christo wouldn’t want to jeopardise the mission…’ Aurelie trailed off as she saw the injured revolutionary, the expression on her face pained. The mob around them erupted anew with accusations, threats and pleas.
‘Christo built this revolution!’ challenged one voice. ‘He should get his chance.’
‘Just let him on long enough to see to his wounds. Please, I can help him,’ implored another.
‘We stick to the plan,’ Aurelie said firmly. She’d lowered the gun.
‘What plan? You said you weren’t leaving us to die!’ You could scarcely see her wince.
‘Where’s the Arco traitor - is he already onboard?’
‘Coward! You only want to escape yourself!’
‘Get back!’ Aurelie shouted again as another man attempted to climb up the hull. One of the guards kicked at his hands, forcing him to let go. Pao whispered in her ear, the words inaudible over the mob, but Jan knew what had been said. They were ready to leave. Despair flooded through him.
Suddenly something fast and serpentine rushed past his leg. Without warning the Dyn exploded from the water, clambering up the hull and using it’s tails to swing itself onto the deck in a single fluid motion. It scythed Pao and Aurelie’s legs out from underneath them with another whiplash flick of those tails then turned on the nearest guard. He fired on the alien but his sidearm didn’t even slow it down. The Dyn slit his throat with a swipe of a vicious blade-like claw.
‘Help me get Christo on board,’ said Jan, climbing up after the Dyn. Tuva didn’t respond.
Jan looked down to see Tuva as paralysed with shock as everyone else was, the survivors suddenly momentarily unsure whether they really wanted to be up there on the catamaran afterall.
‘Come on, now’s our only chance,’ he urged, dropping a rope. Blank faced, Tuva did as he suggested, looping the rope under Christo’s arms then pulling herself up after him.
The final guard had put the bulk of the bathyscaphe’s float between him and the Dyn, and opened fire on it with an assault rifle, driving it into cover. Behind it Aurelie scrambled for her own weapon, but she was too late. The Dyn plunged from the deck, only to reemerge behind the second guard and in an instant it had him hostage, a claw at his neck.
Aurelie barely hesitated, but it was enough. The Dyn flung the man’s body at her as she opened fire, diving for the hatch. It pulled itself inside, disappearing into the depths of the sub. She rounded on Jan, face livid, pulling him towards the hatch as the other revolutionaries came to their senses.
‘We have to get the Dyn off the sub,’ she hissed.
‘There’s no time. Do you want to start a fight with that thing inside?’ he asked.
Aurelie’s expression was thunderous, but she didn’t stop Jan as he pushed past her and Pao, helping Tuva manhandle Christo’s inert form through the hatch and down into the bathyscaphe.
'Are you sure we can't take anymore?' he asked her, although if Jan was honest with himself he already knew her answer.
'We can't take everyone! There's not enough room!' Aurelie shouted over the rising uproar.
Pao struggled inside, as the first boarders began sprinting for the hatch. Jan and Aurelie followed Pao, swinging the hatch closed just seconds before the press of bodies hit them. He caught a glimpse of frantic scrabbling hands, of faces contorted in desperation, faces he recognised, pleading with him, wondering why they had been left behind to die. Then the heavy door was shut and their pleas silenced. Even their fists beating against the thick metal sounded distant.
Jan slid down the ladder, dropping into the capsule. There really wasn’t enough room; they were a seat short, even if you ignored the Dyn, which would have been some feat considering the bulk of its coiled form. It lay in a corner, motionless and unresponsive, as though none of the events of the past hour had ever happened.
Vash had folded himself, spider-like, into one of the seats furthest from the entrance and closest to the Dyn, seemingly entirely unperturbed by it's presence. Tuva had already strapped Christo into one of the seats opposite and was doing what she could to see to his wounds, before she in turn would have to strap herself in. Christo was drifting in and out of consciousness, glancing around the cramped capsule, too disoriented to comprehend where he was or who he was with.
Pao busied himself with the controls as Jan staggered to his feet, still trying to take in his baffling surroundings. Through the small porthole in the wall, Jan thought he could make out a faint brightening through the clouds, as if the sun had come out, only not so.
Aurelie lunged across the capsule, shoving past Jan and Pao, slamming down a red lever on the console. She braced herself against a bulkhead as the solid fuel motors activated in rapid succession, sending the catamaran skimming away from the shore and throwing those that still clung to the hull into the sea. Jan was blasted into a wall, concussed by the sudden shock of the launch. Through the porthole, the sky brightened further.
As he faded in and out of consciousness, Jan thought it fortunate that they had decided to rig the controls for the catamaran through the bathyscaphe for their just-in-time escape. Then as he remembered those poor, desperate souls abandoned to their fate, he wondered darkly whether that too had been intentional; if Aurelie had designed the escape system with this very eventuality in mind. There was no celebration of their survival. It just didn’t seem right.
‘We made it,’ Christo managed, his voice barely above a whisper, as he reached over to clasp Aurelie’s hand in his. Jan saw her anguished smile as she squeezed his hand back. As he lapsed back into oblivion Jan reflected on the small mercy that at least Christo had not had to see his dream so sullied by its confrontation with base reality.



The Dyn projectiles flared brightly as they sliced through the mesosphere, the intense heat of re-entry ablating their outer surfaces. They were little more than metal needles with steering vanes and just enough intelligence to recognise the landmark they were aimed at – a shallow bay littered with corpses and broken machinery.
As each one rushed downwards at eight kilometres per second, punching contrails of plasma through the clouds, they paid no heed to the strange, ungainly vehicle skimming away from their target across the ocean. The catamaran had barely travelled more than a kilometre when the projectiles struck.They impacted in a perfectly choreographed sequence, some at the cliffs and others at specific points along the beach. The explosions merged into a single pulse of heat and light, blasting out a plume of vapour that formed the beginnings of a mushroom cloud. Of revolutionary and soldier alike, there was no trace.
The blast front arrived only a few seconds after the solid fuel motors cut out and Aurelie released the clamps that had held the bathyscaphe in place. The catamaran was shredded and light shone through the water above the bathyscaphe, boiling it to steam, the shockwave violent enough to render the occupants unconscious. The hull rang like a gong and equipment clattered out of racks to smother the survivors, but somehow the bathyscaphe held together and continued to sink beneath the ocean surface, turning end-over-end like a bloated corpse.
End of Part I
Interlude: The World Aflame
Something was terribly wrong. There was no continuity, no sense of awakening or coming to awareness. One moment, Vash was gently drifting off to sleep in the station’s rejuvenation clinic, the next he was awake in a dimly lit and deserted room. He felt a sense of absence too wide and deep to explain, a gap where expanded senses and mentalities should have been. There was nothing around Vash except what he could see, and there wasn’t much of that.
For some reason, the rejuve capsule’s door wouldn’t open. Vash pushed at it weakly with one hand, still garbed in a smock. The transparent plate slid aside slowly and silently. With a supreme effort of will Vash tried to reactivate his expanded mentality, focussing his thoughts down to a fine point, but there was nothing to activate. His personal connection to the Utilitaria had failed like a circuit breaking. The world had lost its guardrails.
Vash dropped down on one knee and stood up, blinking hard. At least the rejuvenation itself was complete – it seemed to have scoured away all of his inserts, along with the broken collagen and aged cells. There was a basic corridor curving up ahead and all the structures were black or grey, so he was probably still on the station. Interface spots were dead or depleted and the room was otherwise empty. He wondered where all the others had gone.
A light above Vash’s head flickered and faded. That one detail, more than the rest, sent a jolt of ice running through his spine – he hadn’t seen such a thing for more than a century. In the world he’d grown into, machinery always worked with unobtrusive perfection. He realized on some level what must have happened; the Utilitaria were absent from the local environment. In Vash’s considerable experience, such a sudden interruption this deep into the heavily scrutinized zones around Earth was without precedent. It was more than unsettling.
Vash started to run; he had the body of a twenty-year-old now, but his muscles were atrophied and physical discomfort was not something he was used to. The floor shuddered. An attack, or a meteoroid collision? Paranoid fantasies of nanobe swarms or massive solar flares swam through his mind.
‘Who’s attacking us? How long until help arrives?’ he demanded. If all else failed the Utilitaria could answer queries directly. The sense of rising panic grew when there was no answer from the ether around him; he squashed it down. Vash hadn’t faced real death in centuries, but he did remember the time before the Utilitaria.
The station shuddered again. He heard the thud of something falling out of a locker but didn’t risk turning. The impulses flaring into his head were telling him not to turn back. There was something outside his understanding going on.
There was a violent shove perpendicular to what he thought of as 'down'. He staggered as the acceleration built.
Vash heard a quiet sob as he descended the fireman’s pole that led to the ‘escape pod’ bay. Even he was shaken, his hands slipping as he descended into the dimly lit bay and fell to the floor, where four others were waiting.
He recognised them all; friends who’d synchronised their clinic visits with his, as was the custom. Calder was something big in the local demarchy; his silvered skin would usually reflect whatever local identity traits he was cultivating, but it was dulled now, as though he were an android. Eoin was the oldest aside from Vash, dressed in a skinsuit, a grim expression on his face. Elvie was a massmind - two clone bodies that shared a single personality, linked by a high capacity datalink. Both her forms were weeping, shocked at the sudden loss of the Utilitaria. She was only as old as she looked - an artificial thirty, thin and neotinic.
‘Thank eternity you made it,’ Eoin said from inside the helmet, lifting Vash to his feet. ‘They brought you up intact as quickly as possible. You look awful,’ he said.
‘I feel like I’ve been microwaved, but you don’t look much better,’ Vash replied, grinning weakly at his friend and groaning as cramps spread through his legs. ‘Do we know what’s going on?’
The lights flickered and both Elvies shuddered, as if suffering an onset of a seizure.
‘EMP, plus some other nasties. When we woke up everything was just… absent. Most inserts and implants gone, no entopics. Must be some kind of high-level viral attack,’ said Calder, by way of explanation; he was trying to control a shudder, the corners of his mouth twitching with anxiety.
‘They’ve been getting worse for the last hour. She’s not taking it well -’ He pointed to the sobbing forms of Elvie and the fibre-optic cable that snaked between her two skulls. ‘She’s switched to a hardwired cable.’
‘Did they tell you this was the end of the world? That’s what they said to me. Doesn’t seem so melodramatic now,’ Eoin said, already walking toward the capsule. The gravity was dropping and changing direction - someone was despinning the station.
‘Where did it come from?’ said Calder. ‘That’s what I don’t understand. First thing I heard was when the capsule ejected me, next thing I knew the Utilitaria was chattering like crazy, telling me there’s some kind of coordinated attack. That it was going to disappear and never return, that we were on our own.’
‘We’ve got to leave,’ said Eoin, taking charge. ‘The Utilitaria were quite clear about that before… before they dropped out. Did they tell you it was forever as well?’
Vash moved to help the nearest Elvie up. She was as light as a child, body filled with augmentations, all of which were failing. Her cold, grey limbs twitched spasmodically, like a spider in its death throes. The EMP blasts or viral strikes from whatever mysterious danger was out there were affecting her badly, but together with Calder they hauled her forms into the escape pod.
‘How do we work this thing?’ Eoin asked, once they were inside and it became clear there was no automatic launch sequence. The pod had been fabricated in a hurry and was still warm - a reflective hyperdiamond cylinder lined with a few transparencies around the top surface. Vash spotted an antique console – actual switches and throttles - and pushed himself forward, searching around the labelled buttons as he forced himself to concentrate. Calder and Eoin looked on as Vash pressed a big green switch in the centre. A moment later they all felt more than a standard Earth gravity shove them clear of the station; a brief chemical burn.
Vash lost his grip on the console and bumped into the wall beside Eoin, rebounding as the thrust abated into freefall. Flares of light filtered through the transparency, resolving into jagged shapes. The view refused to clear, as if Vash’s mind was trying to reject the reality around it. Then, he heard Elvie scream briefly and understood that he wasn’t hallucinating.
The station they’d all travelled to followed a mid-altitude orbit over the Earth’s equator, in a dense band of orbital structures. Now it looked like so much silvery confetti, the habitats shredding apart in a cascade of collisions. Vash felt the fury it propagated even through vacuum. Brilliant white threads inscribed the space above and below them, pushing forward huge spiny machines. They were spacecraft, and they weren’t any type he recognised.
Vash sensed movement in his peripheral vision and turned sharply, his head swimming. Eoin moved to face him but the other two just stared out of the front window, transfixed by the horror of it all. Something slammed into the station, ripping through the rotating wheel. Another vessel swept below them like a marine predator, orbiting lower and faster. Projectiles spewed from it as it passed, seemingly oblivious to their presence. The slugs traced oddly slow-moving curves as they slashed into debris, cascading secondary explosions.
‘Those are some slow-moving bullets. Might even be ordinary gunfire, not mass-driven,’ said Eoin, and Vash nodded emptily, his mind knocking about randomly inside his skull. ‘I remember from old newsfeeds, and I mean really old. That technology is very primitive. Who are they? Why are they doing this?'
‘Can’t be all that primitive,’ Calder interjected. His voice was dead, yet still controlled. ‘They killed the Utilitaria so totally that we don’t even seem to be fighting back. I can’t even imagine how advanced a technology that implies.’
‘They’re inhuman,’ sniffed Elvie, speaking up for the first time, both bodies chorusing together. ‘Not even those Union fanatics would dare do this. No-one would, not ever.’
A horrible suspicion was growing inside Vash, fantasies of rogue superintelligence, the return of the Utilitaria’s defeated competitors. He wondered why he felt so focussed, like this wasn’t really happening to him. Maybe someone had hacked his expanded mentality, projecting fantasy-memories into it? No; this was real. Yet there was an element of calm and rationality to his thoughts; the fact remained that in the world of the Utilitaria, human beings were not so easily broken. Vash turned in the freefall and saw one of the Elvies was curled up, while the other talked in a dead voice, her childlike face empty.
‘Have you looked down yet?’
They all looked. The Earth was aflame, bright clusters of meteors flaring as they touched atmosphere, splashes of blinding radiance imprinted on the surface as they struck. They were passing over Asia and could see the entire Indian subcontinent, a band of fire imprinted across its northern latitudes.
‘Some of the world's largest cities are… were down there,’ said Calder in a broken voice. ‘We have to surrender. Whoever it is, wherever they are. We can’t fight this - we can’t afford the time it would take to win, even if we can win. For Eternity’s sake, there must be a hundred million people caught in that one inferno. Give them what they want.’
‘I expect we are surrendering, if there’s anyone out there still capable of doing that,’ said Vash.
‘They did say we were on our own,’ said Eoin. ‘If the Utilitaria are gone, does that mean all the virtuals are gone too? I couldn’t even put an order of mag estimate on how many deaths that implies.’
‘I just don’t understand any of it! Where did they come from?’ cried the sobbing Elvie. ‘How could anyone kill the Utilitaria that fast?’
‘Aliens,’ said Calder, his shaking hand sweeping to encompass a few of the black ships. ‘This is first contact. Don’t ask me how they got here. Maybe someone that far beyond the Utilitaria really can travel faster than light? Those warships used hyperdrives to jump right next to Earth, stabbing us right in our soft underbelly,’ he laughed weakly. ‘I have to say, we never saw that coming.’
‘No,’ sniffed the second Elvie. ‘That’s impossible. Has to be. FTL is time travel.’
‘Who’s we?’ said Vash. He turned away from the bruised Earth and glanced back at Calder.
‘The ExDef,’ Calder said. He raised his arm, palm flat, and a sigil flared briefly on the outstretched skin. It looked like a line drawing of a jagged tooth. ‘Existential Defence. That’s what we called ourselves; not much more than a few paranoid wargamers. Seems a bit silly now, but we did ask the Utilitaria if they had any plans in the event that hostile aliens came knocking.’
‘Oh, I bet you’re loving this,’ said Eoin. Calder didn’t look perturbed. He closed his palm and the sigil vanished. Vash turned back to the devastated Earth; a thin expanding ring of tsunami was just breaking across the Indonesian archipelago.
‘There were contingency plans for this outcome; a massed invasion,’ Calder said. ‘But the Utilitaria assumed if such a thing happened it would be an attack out of interstellar space, giving us months to prepare. We know there can’t be any large energy sources nearby or we would have seen them. Every hot body radiates energy.’
‘Bit late for Fermi arguments now,’ Eoin chimed in again. Calder glared back at him, as an impact flash from somewhere far below briefly illuminated their faces.
‘The only plausible motive to wage war on an interstellar scale is as part of an expansion to acquire resources, Neumman-style. But we could beat that. The plan was for our Neumanns in the asteroid belt and Kuiper to manufacture a defence fleet over a few weeks and counterattack. We’d have the home advantage, all the mass-energy of the solar system to prepare with and Dragons-teeth warseed templates to beat anything.’
‘Things never work out the way you expect,’ said Vash. He grimaced at the thought.
‘And instead, a fleet of eternity-forsaken alien spaceships just appears in low earth orbit and the Utilitaria are gone,’ Eoin replied bitterly. ‘Like a bloody Diabolus ex Machina. There won’t be any revenge fleet if there’s no warseeds, and there won’t be any warseeds if there’s no Utilitaria.’
‘We really ought to have seen them coming,’ Vash said; a part of him still wondering at their surreal calmness. ‘Remember Souvicou’s Starwhisp launch to Tau Ceti, or the expeditions to Sirius and Proxima? Those ships only massed a few hundred tonnes, and you could still spot their exhaust beams with the naked eye weeks after they left the solar system. A ten thousand tonne battleship - there’s no way you could hide it. You can’t sneak between the stars.’
‘That’s what we thought,’ said Calder. ‘Doesn’t seem to be true, does it?’
‘By the same token, we couldn’t hide any rearmament from them,’ Eoin said. Somewhere off in the middle distance, a pinprick flare briefly illuminated a dying habitat. ‘If we looked to be rearming or gathering our forces, they could just keep dropping rocks on the Earth, then flee the same way they arrived. You can’t hide weapons production on that scale.’
‘They really caught us out,’ Caulder said, face sunken. ‘This is checkmate in two moves. Doesn’t matter how many other pieces we have; they’re in all the wrong places.’
‘We are not in a game,’ Vash said, quietly.
He felt it was wrong on some deep level that they weren’t incapacitated by grief, even after witnessing the deaths of a hundred million fellow humans. The shock would reach all of them eventually, if they survived long enough.
None of them knew what to do next; right now, this empty orbital band seemed the safest place to stay. Vash tried the little capsule’s communications, but the combined EMP effects, along with the mysterious absence of Utilitaria, had silenced every spectrum.
Minutes ticked by as they all floated in silence. Vash wondered idly if any counterattack would come. It seemed unlikely, he reflected; the invaders had the Earth, still home to most of humanity, as a hostage.
The lifeboat crossed into Earth’s shadow a few minutes later and the survivors were greeted with another unwelcome surprise - out of direct sunlight, a dense constellation of new stars were visible. They shone in a bright band like a second milky way, roughly following the plane of Earth’s orbit, stretching back across the sky towards a blue glare point Vash didn’t recognise. Below, the Earth glowed a faint orange as firestorms raged.
‘Ships,’ Calder said dumbly. ‘Tens, maybe hundreds of thousands of them.’
‘Do you suppose this is it?’ Elvie said, voice cracking again. ‘The end of everything?’
Vash wanted to snap at her that he didn’t know; that nobody here knew what was going to happen next. That nothing made sense, that the world had broken and the laws of physics themselves bent to deliver an invading armada whose size was beyond estimation.
‘No,’ he said. ‘Even without the Utilitaria, this is a problem the world can solve. They’re terrorising us, not exterminating. We survived without them before, we can do it again. The rest of humanity can carry on without Earth, or the whole solar system.’
In the subsequent silent minutes, Vash fervently wished that he believed a single word of what he’d said. His attempts to operate the pod’s controls proved ineffective, and frequent sweeps up and down the radio bands revealed nothing but static. Around them, the bright pinpricks of kinetic or nuclear weapons cast fleeting shadows, the shimmer of spallation debris adding thousands of new stars. The cascade of collisions would render low Earth orbit lethal for decades to come.
Vash was facing the wrong way at the time the nuclear weapon exploded and that was the only thing that saved him. A flash of light filled his entire perception, consuming everything in heat.
He saw the others open their mouths for a moment, but there was no time for real emotion to register. The pressure hull burst with a sharp bang and then cracks were spreading and air and people were rushing out. Vash was spun, his grip on the handhold strained even as he felt the cold prickle of vacuum, throwing out a hand to one of the Elvies. Vision began to blur as Calder disappeared through the rent, screaming hoarsely as evaporating spittle puffed around his mouth. Vash halted his spin with an arm-twisting wrench, eyes spinning frantically. Eoin also had a handhold and stretched out to grab onto Elvie’s wrist, just above Vash’s outstretched hand. A moment later, her second body hurtled out of the hole and jerked both her and Eoin clear.
Vash’s strength was gone and he tasted blood in his mouth as the air pressure dropped to nothing. He kept his mouth open and let the air escape, remembering ancient vacuum exposure drills.
The hurricane of escaping air subsided and he let his white-knuckled grip relax. Something shrieked, and out of nowhere a thin plastic sheet materialised, cutting the pod in half, excluding the hole and forming an airtight seal; oxygen flooded back in but Vash had already passed out.
Vash woke with a start. He blinked away the tears and shuddered, feeling a deep tearing in his chest. Despite the pain, his lungs still inflated when he took a ragged breath. Calder and Eoin and Elvie, the closest of his friends had disappeared, gone in an eyeblink. He remembered the most potent things about them; Calder’s amusing politicking, Eoin’s gauche fascination with military history, Elvie’s ever-changing body modifications. Their deaths wouldn’t even be recorded, not today, maybe not ever. Who would remember the dead, if no-one was left alive?
Vash realised then that the screaming hadn’t stopped; he wasn’t the only one. Between crackles and hisses, a voice was emanating from the lifeboat’s short-wave radio.
‘There are no more machine minds. You will surrender unconditionally. The world is restrained.’ The message repeated a few times, then fell silent.
Vash could hardly bring himself to care what the voice was shouting about as the escape pod fell towards Earth. Deorbited by the impact or some suicidal machine instinct, he couldn’t tell.
He was entering the Earth’s atmosphere somewhere over the South Atlantic, and if re-entry didn’t get him then the bombardment the Earth was receiving certainly would. He wondered whether anyone else he knew, any of his friends, would survive today. Maybe this was the beginning of the end of the whole human race. Now, at last, he felt the darkness rise in him. This was the end of everything; if not for the world itself, then for the world as he’d known it. The world of the Utilitaria.
Vash clenched his teeth in frustration, needing and yet failing to find some outlet, some resolution. He felt overwhelmed by the sheer injustice of it all, of not knowing how or why any of this had happened, of being so impotent, of dying without ever seeing this to its conclusion. But screaming wouldn’t make any of it better, so he stayed silent and tried to brace himself against the capsule, deploying the acceleration couch and darkening the transparencies. He felt the lifeboat begin to rumble as it scraped the Earth’s mesosphere and looked out of the survival bubble at the hole made by the fragment of debris, now patched over by a black slick of extruded carbon. As the shaking began Vash started to wonder if he might survive after all.
